docs: add 'immutable deployment' howto (#1840)
edgelesssys/contrast: docs/docs/howto/immutable-deployments.md

Normally, the Coordinator [can be recovered after a restart](./workload-deployment/recover-coordinator.md).
With an empty list of `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys`, this becomes impossible because no keys will be accepted.
This also preempts [workload secret recovery](../architecture/secrets.md#workload-secrets), and thus makes it impossible to re-open [encrypted persistent storage](./encrypted-storage.md) after a Coordinator restart.

:::warning

This action is irreversible.
You won't be able to recover the Contrast Coordinator after a restart.
Further, any associated state will also be irrecoverable.
Removing the `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` effectively turns a (persistent) deployment into an ephemeral one.

**It's highly unlikely that you want to use this feature in conjunction with the encrypted persistent storage feature.**

:::

### Verifying immutability

[Deployment verification](./workload-deployment/deployment-verification.md) works as usual.
The `contrast verify` step for a manifest with removed `WorkloadOwnerKeyDigest` and/or `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` will only succeed if the manifest set on the Coordinator is also missing the corresponding keys,

> thereby guaranteeing no party can update and/or recover the deployment and its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifying that no manifest in the manifest history contained workload owner keys or seed share owner keys guarantees that no party can update and/or recover the deployment and its state.
```

This also preempts [workload secret recovery](../architecture/secrets.md#workload-secrets), and thus makes it impossible to re-open [encrypted persistent storage](./encrypted-storage.md) after a Coordinator restart.

:::warning

This action is irreversible.
You won't be able to recover the Contrast Coordinator after a restart.
Further, any associated state will also be irrecoverable.
Removing the `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` effectively turns a (persistent) deployment into an ephemeral one.

**It's highly unlikely that you want to use this feature in conjunction with the encrypted persistent storage feature.**

:::

### Verifying immutability

[Deployment verification](./workload-deployment/deployment-verification.md) works as usual.
The `contrast verify` step for a manifest with removed `WorkloadOwnerKeyDigest` and/or `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` will only succeed if the manifest set on the Coordinator is also missing the corresponding keys,
thereby guaranteeing no party can update and/or recover the deployment and its state.

Additionally, deletion of the `WorkloadOwnerKeyDigest` and `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` needs to occur before the first use of `contrast set`.

> Setting the manifest and verifying the manifest history will both fail if these keys have been changed.

Reviewer: * Only set will fail, verify is not relevant for this detail.
* Workload owner keys can be changed after the first `set`, but we should still recommend to start with none if immutability is desired.

# Immutable deployments with Contrast

This section provides guidance on how to setup an immutable deployment with Contrast, that is, a deployment which can't be changed after the initial setup.

## Applicability

In multi-party setups with (mutually) distrusting parties, ensuring that no party can alter the deployment or decrypt state can be desirable.

## Prerequisites

1. [Set up cluster](./cluster-setup/bare-metal.md)
2. [Install CLI](./install-cli.md)
3. [Deploy the Contrast runtime](./workload-deployment/runtime-deployment.md)
4. [Add Coordinator to resources](./workload-deployment/add-coordinator.md)
5. [Prepare deployment files](./workload-deployment/deployment-file-preparation.md)
6. [Generate annotations and manifest](./workload-deployment/generate-annotations.md)

## How-To

After running the [`contrast generate`](./workload-deployment/generate-annotations.md) command, the manifest contains fields `WorkloadOwnerKeyDigest` and `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys`.

> Deleting these fields before calling [`contrast set`](./workload-deployment/set-manifest.md) will render the deployment immutable.

Reviewer: Imho the explanation should go into https://docs.edgeless.systems/contrast/architecture/components/coordinator#the-manifest (until we have a dedicated page for manifest ops). The how-to could then reference that for details and just explain how to run generate and the risks posed by this configuration.

> Deleting these fields before calling [`contrast set`](./workload-deployment/set-manifest.md) will render the deployment immutable.

Author: > Imho the explanation should go into https://docs.edgeless.systems/contrast/architecture/components/coordinator#the-manifest (until we have a dedicated page for manifest ops). The how-to could then reference that for details and just explain how to run generate and the risks posed by this configuration.

What part exactly? Just the `Deleting these fields before calling [`contrast set`](./workload-deployment/set-manifest.md) will render the deployment immutable.` sentence (modified)?

> Deleting these fields before calling [`contrast set`](./workload-deployment/set-manifest.md) will render the deployment immutable.

Reviewer: This entire subsection, essentially.

What we should do here:

* Tell people to use `--disable-updates`
* Explain that this removes the workload/seedshare owner keys

What we should do over there:

* Explain what the keys are for and what it means to remove them

```json
{
  "WorkloadOwnerKeyDigests": [
    "<remove this digest to prevent manifest updates>" 
  ],
  "SeedshareOwnerPubKeys": [
    "<remove this key to prevent state decryption and coordinator recovery>"
  ]
}
```

### Preventing manifest updates

To prevent manifest updates, delete the `WorkloadOwnerKeyDigest`.
Now [set the manifest](./workload-deployment/set-manifest.md) through `contrast set`.

> Once completed, the Contrast Coordinator will no longer accept the workload owner key for future manifest changes.

Reviewer: The seedshare owner can still force manifest changes (through recovery), at least if they have access to the Coordinator's ConfigMaps.

Normally, the Coordinator [can be recovered after a restart](./workload-deployment/recover-coordinator.md).
With an empty list of `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys`, this becomes impossible because no keys will be accepted.
This also preempts [workload secret recovery](../architecture/secrets.md#workload-secrets), and thus makes it impossible to re-open [encrypted persistent storage](./encrypted-storage.md) after a Coordinator restart.

:::warning

This action is irreversible.
You won't be able to recover the Contrast Coordinator after a restart.
Further, any associated state will also be irrecoverable.
Removing the `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` effectively turns a (persistent) deployment into an ephemeral one.

**It's highly unlikely that you want to use this feature in conjunction with the encrypted persistent storage feature.**

:::

### Verifying immutability

[Deployment verification](./workload-deployment/deployment-verification.md) works as usual.
The `contrast verify` step for a manifest with removed `WorkloadOwnerKeyDigest` and/or `SeedshareOwnerPubKeys` will only succeed if the manifest set on the Coordinator is also missing the corresponding keys,

> thereby guaranteeing no party can update and/or recover the deployment and its state.

Reviewer: We should mention that all this needs to happen before the first `set`, because it won't be possible (or safe) afterwards, and verification needs to check the history, too.

https://github.com/edgelesssys/contrast/blob/8a86dae81f7c0438fd621c51af191bf1803b9b55/coordinator/internal/userapi/userapi.go#L104-L107
